---
layout: post
title: Making a Web App in 2016&#58; Introduction
---


**WARNING:** This is project is currently under construction and I am writing this blog post as I go. Any content is subject to change without notice. [commit history](http://github.com/getmicah/getmicah.github.io/commits/master/_posts/2016-08-13-web-app-in-2016.md).


For the past couple weeks I have been takin my first steps in "full-stack" web development. Though there has been the usual road blocks when learning a new concept I have been impressed by just how simple it is to get a basic web app up and running. In this blog post I'm going to explain the basic components of a modern web app and how they interact with each other. Like I said, this is my first attempt at building a web app other than simple PHP contact forms so keep that in mind.


# What is a "Web App" Anyways?
This question has managed to puzzle the internet (even [Stackoverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/8694922/whats-the-difference-between-a-web-site-and-a-web-application)). In my opinion a web app differentiates itself from a website if it has at least one of the following:

* Allows the user to interact with it
* Talks to a database or server
* Costs customer another decimal point

The web app I had in mind when starting was one that had a frontend sever that would talk to a backend server (api). That backend server would take in request and store it in a database that way not everything is being done on one server, saving me system resources and making for cleaner code.


# Choosing a Server Languange
In my search for a server side scripting language I found that there were a lot of them. Ruby on Rails seemed like a good option at first but I hadn't any experience in Ruby and I didn't care for the file structure. The Python alternative, Flask, was very cool and more what I was looking for but Python's less verbose nature felt awkward for web development so I decided to look elsewhere. I then decided to look at the technology behind all those "npm install"s I do.

Node.js was a pleasant first experience seeing as though it was the same code I was writing in the frontend. It also didn't require much work to get running, just a simple `node server.js` and I was off to the races. The plethora of packages available through the node package manager is what really made me go with Node.js, especially once I found Express. With Express I was easilly able to get a simple API with routing and models with very little work.


# MySQL and SQLite and MongoDB, Oh My!
This would also be my first working with a true database. Before I would just use a simple json file to store data, but this was in small Python projects and didn't seem like a viable option for the web. I decided to go with MongoDB, mainly because MySQL was pain to install and SQLite had an unappealing name. Not suprisingly there was also an excellent Node.js package called mongoose (I'm a sucker for good names). With mongoose I was able to connect my Node.js server to a Mongo database with ease.


